---
title: "A Year with the Lily58 Keyboard"
categories: [keyboards, tech, life]
description: "In which I describe my experience typing on the Lily58 keyboard for the last year and a half."
---

I discovered mechanical keyboards in 2017, but I couldn't afford my first till
2018. I bought a Zebronics Max Pro, the cheapest keyboard I could afford. It
was rather fun to use, and little did I know that it would fuel my interest for
tactile, clicky keys.

I bought my next keyboard, a HyperX Elite in 2019, and a funny thing happened
around the same time. I decided to teach myself how to type with all then
fingers. Until then, I'd been typing with only a couple. I regret never having
checked my typing speed back then, but I am more interested in the improvement
in accuracy. I had to unlearn a lot of muscle memory in order to type with all
ten fingers. It took some doing on my part.  However, I didn't use the HyperX
for too long. I realized that I wanted a split keyboard sooner than later.

I bought my first split keyboards in 2019, towards December. I ordered a Corne
and a Lily58. The Corne was my daily driver at work for the few months of 2020
that I actually went to a physical office.

Using a split keyboard didn't bother me as much as having to unlearn the new
typing skills I had to learn how to type with an _ortholinear_ keyboard. That
was the toughest bit. I have a friend who prefers skewed split keyboards,
because he believes that affects his normal muscle memory lesser than these. To
each his own, I suppose. I ploughed on, and I'm super thankful that I did. I
genuinely enjoyed the Corne for the few months that I used it. I didn't like
the Lily58, and I felt that the Corne was perfect. That changed with the
Pandemic. 

I no longer needed to use _two_ keyboards. Since I had the Lily58 plugged in
already, I just put the corne away and got used to the Lily.

I never could get around to ordering an ErgoDox EZ really. I was too cheap I
guess. In retrospect, perhaps I'd like one whenever I get around to using it.

The Lily58 is exactly what I need though. It's got the fine balance between
keys for every character, as well as conveniently placed thumb clusters so that
I can use my thumbs for something other than the space bar. I haven't tried
using any other keyboard layout just yet, but it's something I'd like to do,
eventually. Perhaps colemak or Workman.
