
.. _leetcode-system:

=======================================
A System for Getting Better at Leetcode
=======================================

.. index:: meta, learning, interview-prep, leetcode, data-structures,
   algorithms, computer-science

For the longest time I was in denial about the benefits of studying algorithms
and data structures. I wasn't fascinated by Leetcode or other forms of
competitive coding. It felt *drab* to me. I'd rather build something using
programming. That's more fun. Companies should consider my skills based on
Github.

I've seen this sentiment around Hacker News and Reddit as well, and I must
admit, I was influenced by it. A friend of mine constantly recommended that I
learn how to solve DSA problems, but I never got around to it. I tried several
times, but I always failed.

Today, I believe that every company *should* conduct a basic problem solving
test for technical roles. You don't have to use it as a filter, but *do the bare
minimum*, and ask the candidate to actually read a problem that you set them,
and attempt to write code in front of you.

What does this exercise do? It shows you not just their coding skills, but also
their *comprehension* skills. It shows you how your potential colleague asks
questions, how they think. Take home tests might show you more valid parameters,
but as a candidate they *tire* me out. This sentiment is shared by the community
at large.

I'm not saying you should reject candidates on their performance in these
rounds. Far from it, you should just use these to weed out really red flags. If
someone says they can code but they can't even write the semblance of
placeholder code, then that's a red flag.

Far too often I spot people in my organizations who struggle to write code.
Perhaps they're good at other things, but coding is definitely not their forte.
They could be great sys admins or devops people, sure.

It is not my objective, though, to attempt to convince anyone why you should
conduct coding interviews. I've made up my mind to not work at places that don't
conduct them anymore. I'd like to know that the company wants to check my
skills, and I'd also like to know that everyone I work with has been vetted the
same way, so I can hope to expect at least a bare level of coding from them.

So back to my problem. If I think coding interviews are so important, why was I
failing at preparing for them? I wanted to crack interviews, so why was I not
able to follow what it takes to do well at them?

.. admonition:: **James Clear** - *Atomic Habits*
   :class: note

    Goals can provide direction and even push you forward in the short-term,
    but eventually a well-designed system will always win. Having a system is what
    matters. Committing to the process is what makes the difference.

My mistake was that I was not focussing on my system. I was focussing on the
outcome of this system. I wanted to *crack coding interviews*. That is a worthy
goal, at this juncture it's as lofty a goal as any, especially if one sets their
eyes on the large tech companies like Google, Apple or Netflix. But one piece of
advice I offer anyone trying this is to focus on the system you're building for
yourself.

I've been thinking a lot about what sort of system I want to build for studying
how to become better at leetcode. I've offered segments of this advice to
several people. I wanted to take the time to put my thoughts into words so that
I can elaborate on my system, and perhaps track its evolution better.

What does it mean to build a system for learning to leetcode better? Well, it
means that this system won't work if you have an interview in X days. That could
be a month, 3 months, 6 months or half a year. You might get better at "cracking
the coding interview", perhaps, or you might not. Don't focus on that.

With that said, let's begin.

.. note:: Prerequisites

   First, pick a programming language and learn its syntax. You don't need to know
   a lot, because you should not be looking at third-party libraries for these
   problems. Whatever you pick, ensure you learn enough of the syntax to be able to
   write simple problems with strings, arrays, integers, loops, conditionals,
   boolean algebra, functions and hashmaps.

   If you've every taken a class on Algorithms, you can probably skip this step.
   If you have confidence in being able to remember what you've learnt, you should
   stick to that. However, if you feel you've forgotten everything, then you should
   do one of the following, depending on what sort of learner you are.

   1. Read `A Common-Sense Guide to Data Structures and Algorithms
      <https://pragprog.com/titles/jwdsal2/a-common-sense-guide-to-data-structures-and-algorithms-second-edition/>`_
   2. Go through the `MIT 6.006 Introduction to Algorithms Course
      <https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-fall-2011/>`_
   3. Go through the various sections of `data structures
      <https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/data-structures/>`_ and `algorithms
      <https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/fundamentals-of-algorithms/>`_
      from Geeks for Geeks.

   If you're really serious about grokking all of this, you should do all three.
   But these will take time, and *they should*, since you're learning a lot of new
   things at the same time.

-----------------------------
Build a Habit, Progressively
-----------------------------

Your first week of leetcoding shouldn't even be trying to solve a thing. You
should focus on logging into the platform, once a day, for 7 days. Turn off your
password manager. Type your user name and password. Stay logged in for 15
minutes. Set a timer. Keep looking around the website. When you're done, **log
out**. I'd recommend using the Private or Incognito mode of your browser to do
all leetcoding so you will have to type your user ID and password every time.

Your second week, start *reading* problems. Just read them. Read them slowly,
absorb the language. See what sort of words the questions use. Stay on the
website for 30 minutes per day. I'd recommend looking at *Easy* problems with a
high **Acceptance Rate**. That will give you the truly easy problems.

.. warning::

   Remember that the labels for difficult are quite arbitrary and irrelevant.
   You should not consider yourself incapable if you do not do the *Easy*
   problems. Treat the words *Easy*, *Medium* and *Hard* as words from some
   other language. They could be gobbledegook for all you care. Use the labels
   as I recommend, and do not judge your performance on your ability or
   inability to solve problems of any difficulty. As I will elaborate further,
   *that* is not the thing you should measure.

On your third week, you begin trying to solve problems. I say *try* begrudgingly.
Some of you might manage to solve one or two problems, or even more, although
not with ease. That's **irrelevant**. Don't congratulate yourself on the number
of problems you're solving. Focus on spending 1 hour on the website. 1 hour.
That's how long you're going to try to stay logged in. Again, at the end of it,
**log out** and do not store your password on the browser.

From your fourth week, start trying to solve 1 problem a day. Pick the *easy*
ones with a higher acceptance ratio. And time yourself. Don't spend more than an
hour on the website just yet. But keep trying to do this.

-----------------------
Show Up, Consistently
-----------------------

The first step to "leetcoding" is *showing up*. You show up, consistently,
*every*, **single** day. You are sick? Doesn't matter, log into the platform,
**read** a problem.


.. tip::

   My favorite metaphor for learning to leetcode is to treat it like going to
   the gym. Your first objective is not to bench 150 KG. Your objective is to
   not give up in the first few days. You should get up, no matter how bad your
   day has been, and show up for the workout. It is hard. Don't let yourself
   believe that this isn't. If showing up consistently were easy, everyone would
   do so. As time passes, it gets easy, but other things influence the
   difficulty. Good habits are easy to break, unfortunately.

You should consistently show up to the website. Do not break the habit. Do not
give up. Try to log in on mobile and read a problem if you're not near a laptop
or a workstation.

This is the first thing you're going to measure. What is your **streak**? Not
the number of problems you're doing. How many consecutive days have you been
logging in to the platform? Try to get it as close to 90 as possible. Logging in
90 straight days will burn this habit into your routine so you will find it hard
to break it.

-------------------------------
Measure, Measure, Measure
-------------------------------

You need to measure your progress. What do you measure?

Are you logging in consistently?

How long do you take for an ``EASY`` problem on ``TOPIC`` with ``NN%`` Acceptance?

How long do you manage to stay on the platform until you're bored or you're
done?

How many problems have you attempted?

How many problems have you solved?

How long has it been since you've solved a problem on ``TOPIC``?

What time complexity are you managing for each problem?

What space complexity are you managing for each problem?

What's the runtime on each solution?

These measurements give you control parameters that you can tweak. You can use
these to improve your consistency. You can use them to improve how you learn to
leetcode, and how you get better. I'd recommend tracking them however you feel
comfortable. I am going to use some tools I'm building myself to achieve this.
I'm still not sure, but I have some ideas that I'll blog about later.

------------------
Spaced Repetition
------------------

You shouldn't keep doing problems in groups of the same topic. Space them out.
Return to problems you've done before. Return to problems you attempted and
perhaps gave up on. Return to problems where you couldn't manage an optimal
solution. Return to problems where you couldn't manage to improve run time.

---------------------
Learn from Others
---------------------

Read some one else's solution and try to work through it by hand. Sometimes
reading code in another language helps. Remember that most of your job is
*reading* code rather than writing it. But only read others' solutions once
you've managed some level of solution by yourself.

Whenever you read their solutions, make sure you rewrite them in your own
language. This is why I recommend reading them in some other language. If you
code in python, read Javascript solutions. If you code in Java, read solutions
in Python. If you code in Javascript, read code in golang.

Keep an eye on the `/r/leetcode <https://reddit.com/r/leetcode>`_ subreddit. You
can also find good solutions on Youtube and Github. The former might be easier
to search on.

----------------------------
Challenge Yourself
----------------------------

Once you manage to consistently show up for 90 days, mix it up. Go on to a
platform you haven't been using. Hackerrank is good, so is Advent of Code. Try
to do the problems there. Measure this as well.

Explore uncharted territory. Try problems on Project Euler, while these are not
exactly similar to Leetcode, these will help you get more practice in for
writing such code.

---------------------------------
Do Not Measure the Wrong Things
---------------------------------

When you want to work through an exercise regimen, whether for weight loss or
muscle gain, you shouldn't be measuring how much you are able to do. You should
measure the efficiency of your practice. You should be measuring your ability to
show up consistently. Do not measure your inability to solve a problem you think
you should be able to solve.

---------
Compete
---------

By this I don't mean with others, but if you're into that, you *should*. I mean
compete with yourself. Repeat questions you've done before, your system should
allow you to do that. Measure your new time. Compare. Try to see if you can gain
a 10% improvement in a month. Redo the problem a year later. Are you even
faster now?

.. note::

   By repeating problems, your objective should not be to memorize the solution.
   It's to look at an older problem with newer experience. You should be able to
   get better solutions with time. That helps you understand how you're
   improving. If you feel that your older solution was the most optimum, then go
   ahead and retype that. Even retyping an older solution from memory will give
   you the practice you need. You will gain important muscle memory from it.

-------------
Closing Note
-------------

Focussing on a system gives you a process to follow. A routine. You will learn
to enjoy the process for itself. And when you're ready, you should try out mock
interviews. Or even better, you should try real interviews, even if you're not
looking for a job.

.. note::

   As an end note, you can replace leetcode in this article with your favorite
   competitive coding platform. I recommend buying a leetcode premium account
   when you're actually interviewing, but you don't need one to follow along
   with my system.

----------------------------
Resources
----------------------------

Here are a few resources I like to rely on when I'm thinking about my system.
Note that I'm still early in my methodology, and this is a system that will
improve given time.

1. `Ali Abdaal - Spaced Repetition <https://aliabdaal.com/spaced-repetition/>`_
2. `LeetRepeat - Spaced Repetition Tool for Leetcode <https://github.com/mridulghanshala/LeetRepeet>`_
3. `Leetcode Patterns <https://seanprashad.com/leetcode-patterns/>`_
4. `Red Blob Games - Visual Explanations of Math & Algorithms <https://www.redblobgames.com/>`_
5. `CSES Competitive Programming Problem Set <https://cses.fi/problemset/>`_
6. `Competitive Programmers Handbook [PDF]
   </_static/documents/competitive-programmers-handbook.pdf>`_
7. `Forget about Setting Goals. Focus on This Instead - James Clear <https://jamesclear.com/goals-systems>`_
