.. index:: akira-toriyama, dragonball, anime, manga

========================================================
Dear Toriyama-sensei
========================================================

**Date: March 19, 2024**

Dear Toriyama-sensei,

Is it weird that I've been saying that starting phrase to this letter multiple
times the last few days? Ever since I heard of your passing, I have been
reading people's comments online, from those of random Internet people, to
Oda-sensei and Kishimoto-sensei's touching eulogies.

I can't really say I know you that well. I never touched your video game bodies
of work, oddly though, I'd just started playing Chrono-Trigger [#chrono_trigger]_ a few weeks ago.
I don't know what made me start playing it. I'd tried several times earlier in
my life, but I never went too far.

I guess I wanted to write down what you mean to me. What your work did for me,
someone in India, whose entry into Anime was, naturally, Dragonball Z. At least
I thought it was.

I grew up watching a show called Captain Majid in Bahrain, which I later
discovered was Captain Tsubasa. [#capt_tsubasa]_ Perhaps that was my first anime.
I was also into Speed Racer, [#speed_racer]_ which was also an anime. I cannot
recall if I watched Alps no Shoujo, Heidi, [#heidi]_ before or after Dragonball
Z.

But what I do remember is discovering Dragonball Z. As many Indian children who
could afford one back then, I owned a bootleg gaming console. [#india_famiclone]_ It was a
famicom/SNES/NES mix that had some weird releases that you didn't find in other
places. Some of the games were the usual ensemble, Super Mario Bros,
[#mario_bros]_ Contra, [#nes_contra]_ Contra Force, [#contra_force]_ TMNT III The
Manhatten Project, [#tmnt_manhatten]_ Mortal Kombat, [#famicom_mortal_kombat]_
Street Fighter [#famicom_street_fighter]_ and Ninja Gaiden 3. [#ninja_gaiden_3]_

The cartridges were sold by toy stores who didn't know much about them. I
frequented one and bought a cartridge which claimed it had a game I saw at a
friend's house called DJ boy. [#dj_boy]_ I was excited to come home and play it.

It didn't. It had 4 games, and 3 of them were something called Dragonball Z. I
later discovered that it was a bootleg copy of Super Butouden 2,
[#super_butouden_2_unlicensed]_ with the story mode stripped out. I played this
game for hours with my friends.

I started playing the game, and *all* of the text was in Japanese. I
didn't know who the characters were, only that this was a *killer* fighting
game. The color tones were **bad**, mostly monochrome characters. I picked the
coolest looking characters to use. Little did I know that even then I picked
Goku and Gohan. I pitted them against Frieza and Cell.

I had no idea what I was doing.

That was the year that Toonami came to India. Dragonball Z started airing in the
evenings every week and it caught my attention when I saw my sister watching it
one day. How was I to know that casually watching this show would change my
life in 2001?

I'd never seen such a brilliant show before! Each episode carried into the next,
revealing lore and exposition. I was hooked by the time Raditz was killed. I
*loved* the Special Beam Cannon and Piccolo was quickly my favourite character.

I didn't know, sensei, what I was getting into.

Cartoon Network only aired 52 episodes, in repetition. [#toonami_ocean_dub]_ I
didn't know what happened after Goku beats Recoome on Namek with one blow. I
didn't know what a *Super Saiyan* was, something that Vegeta kept going on and
on about. I wanted to know more, and that was around the time that the internet
became more widely available in India through *cyber cafes*. I'd go to these
cyber cafes, pay an hourly price and read up on what would happen on Dragonball
Z via the official website. I was mesmerized by this site, and wanted to have a
local copy at home on my computer. It was 2003 and I didn't have an internet
connection back home.  So I began downloading images on a floppy disk, and took
them home to use as wallpapers or just to save them on my storage drive. I had a
friend print out a few to use as "posters", they were postcard sized and his
printer ran out of some colors so they were all mostly monochrome. I didn't even
know what some of them were. I remember them vividly now.

.. figure:: /_static/images/posts/toriyama/trunks_v_frieza.png
    :alt: Trunks vs Frieza

    Trunks slicing Frieza in half. I didn't even know who this was when I got this printed!

.. figure:: /_static/images/posts/toriyama/makkankosappo.png
    :alt: Makkankosappo

    The Special Beam Cannon was my most favourite move! Even more than the Kamehameha!

.. figure:: /_static/images/posts/toriyama/piccolo-vs-frieza.png
    :alt: Piccolo vs Frieza

    Piccolo was my most favourite character! I used to think that he would grow into one of the most powerful characters in the show and outshine Goku! I didn't know he was a villain in Dragon Ball.

And in 2004, I began getting episodes from friends. I started saving them to my
drive, and the collection began. I didn't have continuous episodes, mind you. I
had a few here and there. I think the first set I got was the Android saga. It
was the episode where the Androids appear and impale Yamcha, and the next 3
episodes until Goku is about to faint. Then, a gap, and episodes starring
Vegeta, who has already revealed he's a Super Saiyan too, and now he's attacking
the base of Dr. Gero. I had the episodes until the defeat of SSJ Vegeta and the
rest of the Z-warriors at the hands of 17 and 18. And then, the cell stuff
started with the two time machine mystery.

I had the episodes with Kami and Piccolo fusing, and then the confrontation with
Cell for the very first time.

After another gap, I saw Semi-Perfect Cell absorb 18 to become perfect, to
pummel Vegeta into the ground, and then embarass Trunks by telling him that his
so called powerup was a joke.

Then, after one or two slice-of-life episodes with General Tao and the Memories
of Gohan, I had the first few episodes of the Cell Games. I think I had them all
until Cell explodes, taking Goku with him. I didn't have the climactic battle
with Cell and Gohan squaring off.

Mind you, I hadn't seen Goku vs Frieza yet, I hadn't watched the Trunks saga, or
Vegeta transform for the first time. I was watching all of this out of order
because this is how my friends and I got them.

One of my oldest friends to date was a stranger back then. He randomly showed up
at my door step one day and said "I heard you have the Cell Saga, I have the Buu
Saga." That's how I met Sumanth, a friend I speak to almost weekly even now, 20
years later!

I don't remember getting all the episodes of DBZ, but it must have been after I
got a broadband connection at home. It was a measly 64kbps, but I remember that
it would take 37 minutes to download one anime episode. The episodes were 320p,
encoded with *rmvb* [#rmvb_format]_ back then. I got them from websites like freeza.nl and
dbzfighters.com. The latter would become the first forum I joined online, where
I would have heated discussions with people I'd come to call friends. One of
them is still in touch with me today. We lovingly call you Bird Mountain Man.
Oddly enough, we have still never met.

I watched Dragonball later, mostly to discover what Goku's beef with Piccolo
was. And boy was I shocked! Somehow, with lesser beam struggles, weaker
opponents and less visually appealing fights, Dragonball made me more connected
to your world. I *still* bawl when I watch Goku realize that the mysterious
masked fighter at Fortune Teller Baba's tournament is his dead grandfather. That
connected with me most because I wish my grandfather would return to life for
just one day too.

I watched DB, DBZ and DBGT several times over the next few years. Eventually,
I'd go on to watch Super as well, and all the movies of course. But this isn't a
letter where I want to talk about the artistic greatness of your work. There are
several, amazing analyses of your work already, and I have nothing to add there.
This is something more personal.

I have a career because of you, Toriyama-sensei. After spending hours looking
through Dragonballz.com, [#dbz_dot_com]_ I wanted to make my own website for the
show, where I would have chapter summaries, and even detailed scene
descriptions. I wanted to have a novelized Dragonball Z. I began learning web
development to do this, and spent every moment I could trying to build a
website. I never launched this online since it needed money, but this started my
interest in computers.

And the friends I made because of this show, we became closer over other anime,
and we went on to share careers in the same domain. I learnt how to use torrents
because of your show, and went to understand how to write scripts to download
episodes. I learnt how to install mods in games, something I didn't have any
necessity for until I discovered Bid for Power and ESF. [#BFP_ESF]_ You gave me
a career that allowed me to go back and buy every volume of Dragonball and
Dragonball Z in the last few years.

When I read the official notice of your passing, [#toriyama_dead]_ I was shaken.
I felt like I lost a family member. It is odd. These days, I am way more
obsessed with One Piece than I am with Dragonball. I joke that the day One Piece
ends, I will sit in a corner and cry while laughing because I've been reading it
for 19 years now.

I didn't get that with Dragonball. I was too young and the manga wasn't
available here when I was growing up. I read the manga only last year, and was
surprised with the differences from the anime. I remarked to my friends that the
DB manga was more... fluid compared to the anime.

Toriyama-sensei, thank you. I don't know how to tell you this, now that you are
in the next dimension, but thank you. I genuinely wanted to tell a story as
amazing as Dragonball Z, which is what I was trying to do when I was still
writing my stories. I wanted to have a book full of power struggles as visual as
Goku vs Vegeta. Heck! I loved the idea of fusion so much that I had to have it
in my book as well.

I can't imagine a life where I didn't encounter your work. I can't imagine a
life where it didn't lead me to One Piece, to finding my biggest source of a
moral compass in life.

I watch anime and every single time I see a DBZ reference now, I tear up. There
is no way any mangaka can ignore the influence you have had on the industry.
There is not one way where anyone can deny the influence you've had on the
entertainment industry.

Toriyama-sensei, I hope you are having fun with the Grand Kai. You deserve it.
May Shenlong grant you eternal peace. And of course, I hope you get a chance to
teach a dinosaur to ride a ball. [#cha_la_head_cha_la]_

.. figure:: /_static/images/posts/toriyama/collection.jpg
    :width: 720
    :alt: My Dragon Ball Collection

    I've started collecting the rest of your work. Arale-chan is hard to find in
    India, but I'm going to give it my best.

.. rubric:: Footnotes


.. [#chrono_trigger] `Chrono Trigger <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrono_Trigger>`_

.. [#capt_tsubasa] `Captain Tsubasa <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Captain_Tsubasa>`_

.. [#speed_racer] `Speed Racer - Mach GoGoGo <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_Racer>`_

.. [#heidi] `Heidi, Girl of the Alps <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heidi,_Girl_of_the_Alps>`_

.. [#india_famiclone] India had several varieties of Famiclones, bootleg clones of the Famicom back in the late 90s and early 2000s. Many people owned one, and back in those days it was the only consoles you could afford unless you were rich and had someone abroad bringing you cartridges and discs. `Tracing the Origins of Gaming in India: 8 Bit Cricket, Sega, and Cloning. <https://web.archive.org/web/20211023185036/https://gadgets.ndtv.com/games/features/tracing-the-origins-of-gaming-in-india-8-bit-cricket-sega-and-cloning-640129>`_

.. [#mario_bros] `Super Mario Bros <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_Mario_Bros.>`_

.. [#nes_contra] This was a bootleg of the NES version of `Contra <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contra_(video_game)>`_

.. [#contra_force] `Contra Force <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contra_Force>`_

.. [#tmnt_manhatten] `Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III: The Manhattan Project <https://turtlepedia.fandom.com/wiki/Teenage_Mutant_Ninja_Turtles_III:_The_Manhattan_Project>`_

.. [#famicom_mortal_kombat] `Mortal Kombat <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mortal_Kombat_(1992_video_game)>`_

.. [#famicom_street_fighter] `Street Fighter 2 <https://bootleggames.fandom.com/wiki/Street_Fighter#Street_Fighter_II:_The_World_Warrior>`_

.. [#ninja_gaiden_3] `Ninja Gaiden III : The Ancient Ship of Doom <http://www.hardcoregaming101.net/ninja-gaiden-iii-nes/>`_

.. [#dj_boy] `DJ Boy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DJ_Boy>`_

.. [#super_butouden_2_unlicensed] The international bootleg rip of the original `Dragonball Z Super Butouden 2 <https://dragonball.fandom.com/wiki/Dragon_Ball_Z:_Super_But%C5%8Dden_2>`_ didn't have a story mode, and by the looks of it, repurposed sprites and colors from other games, giving it a strange monochromatic palette for characters. `Youtube has several videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PDEiyDH0ND4>`_ on the game, I don't find anything really noteworthy for others despite it having nostalgic value for me personally. `Here's a useful reddit post about it <https://old.reddit.com/r/Famicom/comments/173o3ha/dragon_ball_z_super_butoden_2_nes_pirate/>`_

.. [#toonami_ocean_dub] Cartoon Network India started airing Dragonball Z in 2000, and the original run was the same as the `Ocean Dub (Saban Dub) fiasco of the US. <https://dragonball.fandom.com/wiki/Ocean_Group_dubs#The_Saban_dub_(1996-1998)>`_ So we only got the cut episodes from the Arrival of Raditz to Goku... a Super-Saiyan?

.. [#rmvb_format] Because of its low bitrate, and probably because of the presence of the Real Media Player back in the early 2000s, most anime was shared in the `RMVB <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RMVB>`_ format. I remember going to buy a TV at a store armed with a thumbdrive with some RMVB files, to see if the TV would support it. Panasonic was the only one that supported it all.

.. [#dbz_dot_com] Funimation used to run `dragonballz.com <https://dragonballz.com>`_, and for the longest time, this was the only website I'd spend time on. They introduced region locking sometime in the early '10s, and ever since, the site has been inaccessible in India.

.. [#BFP_ESF] `Bid For Power <https://www.dbzgames.org/download/bid-for-power/>`_ was a Quake III Arena modification that essentially turned Q3 into Budokai Tenkaichi. The melee was bad, but the beam struggles and maps were excellent. I played it for hours. `ESF, or Earth's Special Forces <https://esforces.com/>`_ is one of the best mods for Half Life 1 that you can find. Well, at least try to find. It is not done yet, and there's no point waiting for it, but it was an excellent experience while it lasted, since the melee was really great and I had so much fun playing the 1.2a version until the community seemed to break down after a leak. The models were excellent and I truly believe that even if I didn't get into programming later in life, I'd have learnt to code just to learn how to write game mods myself.

.. [#toriyama_dead] `Akira Toriyama, Mangaka Known for 'Dragon Ball' and 'Dr. Slump', Dies at 68 <https://web.archive.org/web/20240314114841/https://japannews.yomiuri.co.jp/society/obituaries/20240308-173259/>`_

.. [#cha_la_head_cha_la] `The lyrics <https://www.daizex.com/multimedia/lyrics/jap-cha_la_head_cha_la.html>`_ of `the Dragonball Z japanese opening <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VyaKCN5rljw>`_ contain a phrase which says "If I find a dinosaur, I will teach it to ride a ball." This has since become a meme because of its wide popularity `thanks to Team Four Star. <https://teamfourstar.fandom.com/wiki/Toriyama_(Bird)>`_