16 March 2016 · Västra Tunhem, Sweden ·
Shared with Public
I do think of home.
I've been asked, since I have fallen in love with this land, if I miss my home. It goes without saying that I do.
But I miss my other home, the sacrosanct place of my birth. I visited it a year ago, at my cousin's wedding, and I had stayed away for years before that. I don't know why. I want to go see it once again.
I come from a place that is so different to this one. Where I come from, there is no ice, no snow. The heat is unimaginable these days, but I want to go there.
I come from land of Krishnadevaraya, the king who commanded the eight Telugu poets of old. I come from the land where stories of the Ramayana aren't distant myth, no, they are tales people recite in strong connection with the neighbouring ruins and forests. Here, they say, Rama wept for Sita. Here, they say, were the Vanaras.
The place where I come from, our mythology is our inevitable culture, our past.
I do think of the home I was born into, and I cannot wait to go see it again.
I yearn to see Hampe once again.
The rocks and boulders call to me. There may be heat, but there is also the blood infused perspiration that has given me a past heritage that I am proud of.
I yearn to see Hampe, to learn Kannada and Telugu, and to sit down by the boulders, and to write songs of how the Tunga and the Bhadra become one.
Those before me kept vigil of Rudra, they bowed to none but Kali, they wrote songs of the Lord of the Seven Hills, but I, I bow to no one but to the soul, soil and boulders of Hampe.
