.. on-learning::


========================================================
Meditations on Learning
========================================================

.. index:: life, learning, education, career


--------------------------------------------------
Study Every Day
--------------------------------------------------

The only career advice I ever received from my cousin, who's one of the most
successful people I know is this. "No matter how busy your day is, no matter
what happens, make sure you set aside two hours a day to study and learn
something new."

I took his advice seriously. In fact, I assumed that this was the most sane
advice I could ever get from someone in my family.

Study every day.

Taken quite literally though, this doesn't scale. Life comes in the way. You
have things to do, people to meet, places to be. However, the take away has
always been, *learn constantly*.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Study Despite Your Surroundings
-----------------------------------------------------------

Not many people like to learn though. I've had people ask me *why* I want to
learn. The company isn't paying for it, after all. I've had people ask me if I'm
doing it to get more money, or better jobs.

I learn because I am curious to a fault. I like to understand things from a
basic level. At one level, this is my crippling imposter's syndrome, making me
ensure that I understand things from a first-principles approach. I don't
consider myself to be the smartest person in the room. I have friends who are
ridiculously smart. One of them was meddling with circuits when she was a child.
Another was figuring out how Linux worked when we were in school. I am nothing
in front of them. So, I compared the people I worked with to these friends.

It's sad how realism comes to smack idealism in the face on a regular basis.

Most of the people you will meet do not want to learn. I am not so sure I know
what does this. Perhaps it's the school system. I love saying I love to learn
*despite* my schooling, not because of it. My teachers, most of them, were
atrociously bad. Some of them were even cruel human beings. They didn't belong
near children, not their own, let alone someone else's.

However I still *love* to learn. I like learning *how things work*. I love
learning how to take things apart and put them back together again. I'm known
for telling people to not learn Django, but what I mean when I say that is that
don't learn Django as your *first* web-framework. Learn Flask, learn express.js,
not because these might be superior, and trust me when I say this, they are
*not*; but because Django hides things under the hood. You don't get to see
what's happening when your request comes in, guns akimbo, and something,
*something*, doesn't match. Have you ever had a HTTP request come in where the
mandatory blank line between the headers and the payload is missing? Do you know
what Flask would do? It would crash the server. Django would handle it well,
like a production-grade web-server would, and returns a 415. But most developers
are content *not knowing*. And that is okay.

I need to internalize this myself though. A lot of the people I come across in
life do not like to learn. They do not want to learn. They will accept things as
fact without asking for the proof. This is how you have people who believe in
ideals without questioning them. And that's okay. That's not a problem. I don't
need to agree with them. I can still work with them.

---------------------------------------------
Ask the Answerable Questions
---------------------------------------------

Sometimes you don't get answers. The biggest reason I love books is that they
will reveal whatever they contain to you. Sure, some authors are bad at
explaining things. Some of them are downright liars when it comes to the format
of their content. However, it's still a superior medium to asking people
directly. Yet, I believe in asking questions. Most importantly, I love asking
*why*. *Why is something the way it is?* *Why does this work?* *Why does that
not work?* *Why did this happen?*

My time :ref:`working at a shop floor <memories-of-a-shop-floor>` taught me `the
importance of asking why. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_whys>`_


.. warning::

   This document is still a work in progress.
