---
title: Building a Career in Programming
layout: post
categories: [meta, life, technology, career]
description: "In which I speak about how you can build a career in programming, and how the experience has been for me, personally."
---

I'm a software programmer (is there any other kind?). I work at a company and
translate requirements, sometimes vague, sometimes unrealistic, into code
blocks that do _something_.

Why am I being dispassionate about this? Trust me, I'm not. I'm one of those
few in the industry who is extremely passionate about the field. I'm
self-taught, and I didn't stem from a bootcamp. I just stumbled into this
career without a plan, and sometimes wonder if a plan would have just hindered
me. Sometimes I wish I had a mentor. Sometimes I'm thankful I didn't have one.
I'm self-_made_.

That being said, I've spent considerable effort trying to help others break
into the industry.  I've spoken at meetups and conferences, I've given
workshops, and I've constantly mentored and trained junior developers and
anyone who reaches out to me. And I've noticed something that I cannot teach.

I cannot teach you to be passionate about programming the same way that I am.
It's not something I acquired with practice. My skills in python and backend
development can certainly be acquired. The curiosity with which I read
documentation and try to find a usecase for Rust at my workplace everyday? I
don't know how to teach that.

And this is weird because I didn't think it was _special_ when I first got into
the industry. I assumed _everyone_ was so passionate. It's a beautiful field to
be in. Where else can you make _something_ from _absolutely nothing?_ However,
I discovered that not everyone sees things this way.

I was distraught when I discovered this.

It took me a while, but then I realized my mistake. This passion is not
something everyone _needs_ to succeed. If this industry needed passion to
succeed, so many of us would quit. I was wrong to think that passion was
something everyone needed to have. Instead, what you need is patience and
consistency.

You need to show up, every day, and consistently deliver code. To my eyes, it
was akin to asking a writer to show up everyday and writing the same number of
words _and_ progressing the story at the same pace, every day.

It doesn't work that way. Not the volume, but the analogy. Software isn't like
writing a book. It's more like putting a book together. Sometimes, the chapters
are all there, out in the open source field, but you need to do some groundwokr
before you can put them together.

And here's where it gets odd. Those open source libraries took passion to
build, at least in the beginning. That's how it starts, but if you only
prioritize passion, none of them would have been completed. You need to instead
learn to harness that initial burst of passion and build things with an even
pace. Learn to leverage your bursts of passion, if you have those, and create
chunks of work for yourself. 


